@document.meta
    title: Master thesis description
    description: 
    author: jakob
    categories: 
    created: 2021-10-01
    version: 0.1
@end


* Temporary thesis statement
  Vi ønsker å utvikle refaktorerings-støtte for ABS (abs-lenke). Vi bygger på eksisterende
  Xtext grammatikk. Ønsker å tilby nye refaktoreringer. Ønsker å finne ut hva som er beste
  måte å støtte refaktoreringsaktiviteter i LSP-protokoll. Muligens en LSP-change
  proposal (https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.02961).

  The thesis will be based around implementing refactoring support for the ABS
  programming language (link). We want to offer users of the language more refactorings
  and a way to apply them. To do this we will build upon an existing Xtext grammar
  and work with the LSP protocol. A proposal to extend the LSP protocol might be made
  in order to accomplish this goal. Based on this the temporary thesis statement and
  research questions will be:

  - How should refactorings be implemented in programming languages?
  - Which refactorings can we safely implement?

* Methodology
  Our methodology will consist of the following steps:
  - Read relevant existing research
  - Specify requirements for the implementation
  - Implement software
  - Evaluate the software according to the requirements

  Since development of ABS is at IFI, we will work with the maintainers of the
  ABS language over the course of the thesis.

* Progress plan, with milestones
 ** Autumn 2021
    - Deliver project plan and read relevant curriculum and papers

 ** Spring 2021
    - Read relevant papers
    - Connect previously developed refactorings from Erlend Kristiansen's master thesis
    with ABS, using LSP.
    - Narrow down the scope of the thesis based on the result of the previous step
    - Formulate a thesis for and write essay

 ** Autumn 2022
    - Analyze LSP and determine if the protocol is sufficient for refactoring.
    - Propose alternatives/extensions to the LSP protocol
    
 ** Spring 2022
    - Implement and evaluate alternative proposal
    - Implement more refactorings for ABS if possible
    - Finish master thesis

* Relevant curriculum
 ** IFI
    - IN5320 - Development in platform ecosystems
    - IN5170 - Models of concurrency
    - INF5110 - Compilers
    - IN5440 - Selected topics in static analysis

* Study plan
 ** Autumn 2021:
    - IN5320 - Development in platform ecosystems x
    - IN5290 - Ethical Hacking
    - IN5170 - Models of concurrency

 ** Spring 2021:
    - Kompilatorteknikk x
    - Testing av programvare

 ** Autumn 2022:
    - IN5110?
    - IN5440? x




Temporary thesis statement
The methodology you will be using
A progress plan for your thesis, with indicated milestones
Curriculum relevant to your master's thesis.
