$ Code snippet
Part of the source code for a program

$ Code clone
{$ Code snippet} having the same or similar code in the same or different software system

$ Type-1 Code clone
X and Y are syntactically identical code snippets. Only comments, white space etc may
differ

$ Type-2 Code clone
X and Y are structurally identical code snippets. Identifier names, literals, type names
may differ. Type-1 differences apply

$ Type-3 Code clone
X and Y are similar snippets, some statements may be added, removed or modified. The
analyst defines a threshold θ for allowed difference.

$ Type-4 Code clone
X and Y are syntactically different snippets, but functionality is the same.

$ P-match
Parameterized match. For a type-2 clone pair (X, Y), all occurences of a in X are replaced
with b in Y.

$ Clone detector
Program which takes a target source code as input, reports code clones, clone pairs or
clone sets as output.

$ Analysis granularity
Which clones the analyst decides to discard and keep for analysis. For example
method-level granularity only repots code clones of complete methods. Fine-grained
granularity can report smaller and more precise movement of code, while coarse grained
will give overview of the structure amongst potentially multiple systems

* Analysis (detection) process
  - Often plugins or stand-alone programs
 ** Front End
    - Inputs source code
    - Pre-process and transform to internal representation
    --- (tree-parsing, metrics measurements, ...)
    - Map construction between source and internal representation
    - For type-2 clone detection, user-defined identifiers and literals are often
      transformed that erase the difference.

 ** Matching
    - Same or similar code sinppets are identified
 ** Approaches
  *** Sequence-Matching
      - Source code is treated as a character/token sequence internally.
   **** Methods
         - Use an algorithm for finding all "maximal repeats"
         --- An exactly equal substring of two substrings which cannot be extended
         - Use suffix trees
         --- Classically requires a lot of memory
         --- Therefore suffix array algorithm is more popular
         ----- Requires less memory

 ** Chunk-Comparison
    - Source code is decomposed into sequences of chunks
    --- Blocks of statements, functions, files, ...
    - Define signatures to represent the characteristics of a chunk
    - Search for chunks with same or similar signatures
    - Can for example transform each chunk into a tree, and search for similar AST's or
    PDG (Program Dependence Graph)
    --- Can detect type-3 and type-4 clones

 ** Hybrid approach
    - Match chunks of sequences?
    - N-grams

